now if someone asks you to name the most
common colors
you'd probably likely go with red green
and blue
yet until modern times your ancestors
didn't realize blue
was a color at all back in the 1800s
british scholar william gladstone
noticed that in his famous odyssey
homer didn't use the word blue at all he
even called the ocean deep red
homer described clothing armor human
faces
and animals in detail but all the colors
were somewhat messed up
iron and sheep were violet and honey
green
black was mentioned in the book 200
times white around 100
and red yellow and green less than 15
times each
it was the same in other ancient greek
writings the word blue
didn't exist at all gladstone thought
that the monochrome way of seeing the
world
was something typical for the ancient
greeks
but some years later his followers
continued with the research
and they found no mention of blue in
other cultures either
ancient icelandic sagas chinese stories
arabic and hindu texts all of them
avoided blue
even when they talked about the skies it
turns out
the first people that used the word blue
to describe this color
were the egyptians they also happened to
be the only people that produced blue
dyes
well that's probably why there's no
mention of the ancient greeks or any
other ancestors
sing in the blues did i make that up i
did
now it may sound strange until you
realize the only thing in nature that
looks blue
is the sky there aren't that many blue
animals or blue flowers in the wild
and blue eyes used to be even rarer in
ancient times than they are now
that's why almost every language first
developed the words for black and white
then red yellow and green but just
because there was no name for the blue
color doesn't mean our ancestors
couldn't see it at all
this color just didn't stand out to them
there's a tribe in namibia called himba
they still don't have the word for blue
they also don't distinguish between
green and blue
they have something like gru instead
when they were shown
one blue and 11 green squares they
struggled to find the odd one out
but they have more words for the shades
of green than there are in most other
languages
that's why the tribe members found the
slightest differences in the shades of
the green
squares in no time when russian speakers
are shown different shades of blue
they can pick out lighter and darker
ones way faster than english speakers
this is because they use separate words
for light blue and dark blue
rather than just one universal word
where you live
can change the way you perceive colors
for example
the greeks who have lived in the uk for
a long time
often consider light blue and dark blue
one color
but in greece they normally use two
separate words for them
like in russia the way you perceive
colors
isn't just about seeing what's out there
it's more about how your brain
processes what you see which means it's
very subjective
some people even see colors as letters
and numbers
or hear them those who live closer to
the arctic circle can name
different shades of snow because that's
what they see all the time
to others it's just white some languages
only have general names for colors for
example
dark stands for cool hues like black
blue and green colors like white red
orange and yellow are all called warm
your eye
processes more variations of warmer
colors than cooler ones
there's a tribe in australia who
describes texture
the function of an object and how it
feels instead of color
they don't have any names for colors at
all
the kandoshi who live on the banks of
the amazon river in peru
don't have a word that would describe
the very concept of color
instead the name of some yellow bird
will be used to describe the yellow
color
any ripe fruit will stand for red and
unripe fruit for dark green
the english language didn't have the
word for orange
until the 1500s that's when someone
brought the first orange trees from asia
to europe
until then the hue was called yellow red
sir isaac newton was the one to name the
colors of the rainbow
red orange yellow green blue indigo
and violet he noticed these hues after
watching a beam of light
pass through a triangular prism the
initial white light was split into seven
colors
when you look at an object millions of
light receptors in your eyes
send a message to your brain via the
optic nerve
some of these receptors are shaped like
rods and others like
cones newton said that objects weren't
actually colored it was their surface
that reflected some colors and absorbed
others
when an object reflects all wavelengths
the thing looks white
when it absorbs them all it looks black
an apple looks red because it reflects
red wavelengths and absorbs
all the rest that's why objects may seem
to change color
depending on what's next to them or in
different lighting conditions
the human eye has three types of cones
these photoreceptor cells
distinguish between red green and blue
wavelengths of light
each type is responsible for about 100
different shades
altogether they let you see one million
colors
about one percent of people have a
fourth type of cone
it gives them a super power of
distinguishing between one hundred
million shades of different colors
about eight percent of men and one
percent of women
have color deficiency that's because
they're missing some cones or have bad
ones
most of them don't even know about it as
some colors have
always looked identical to them the most
widespread kind of such deficiency is
when you can't tell red from green
a lot of people lose their ability to
perceive colors as they get older
by around age 70 their eye lenses become
yellowish
this natural yellow filter they look
through doesn't let them tell blue from
purple and yellow from green
half your brain is hardwired to process
visual information
a much smaller part of it is left to
perceive flavor
that's why the color of a food or drink
can boost
or curb your appetite you'll always
choose the reddest apple
because your brain perceives it as the
sweetest and ripest
there are no naturally blue foods so
you're least attracted to them
and can even fear them that's why
installing a blue light in your fridge
or eating from blue plates is a great
way to eat less
you'll always choose brighter fruits and
vegetables because they're associated
with a richer flavor
eating them makes you feel healthier and
happier
yellow can boost your appetite as you
associate it with
energy and excitement white can trick
you into eating more and paying less
attention to what you're munching on
that's because white food seems more
harmless in terms of calories
if you eat from a white plate you're
more likely to overeat as it makes food
look brighter
your brain also remembers the color food
wrapping
if you put salt and vinegar chips into a
cheese and onion package
you might not even notice the difference
in flavor while snacking on them
food companies know you'll eat more of
whatever they're selling
when it comes in different colors and
flavors curiosity or
search for your favorite taste won't let
you stop
the colors that surround you in the
office affect your productivity
creativity and mood blue helps you focus
it's an intellectual color that stands
for logic and efficiency
red gives you courage and strength for
physical work
yellow makes you happier and more
productive and confident
green brings balance and harmony to the
office environment
your eyes also love this color they
don't need time to adjust to it
orange gives you a sense of comfort and
warmth so it's perfect for an office
lounge
birds fish and many mammals see the
entire color spectrum in all its glory
just like humans for some animals good
color vision is crucial
without it they won't tell ripe red
fruit from unripe green fruit
but some insects like bees also perceive
ultraviolet colors that your eyes can't
see
jumping spiders have eight pairs of eyes
the biggest of them provide the
creatures with high resolution vision
they also have a broader spectrum of
colors than humans
and special pigments that can perceive
ultraviolet light
bulls are partially colorblind and can
only see yellow green
blue and violet they don't have the red
retina receptor
so they can't see red ah so much for
that cape thing
dogs have two types of color detecting
cones
one type fewer than humans they can
perceive yellow and blue to ultraviolet
light
your cones work great in relatively
bright light and your rod cells help you
see in dim light
but in this case everything around looks
like shades of gray
unlike humans geckos have perfect night
color vision
it's 350 times better than yours
garden snails can't focus or see color
at all
they manage to navigate towards dark
places thanks to their ability to feel
and analyze the intensity of light